.. _specs/rfc9068:

RFC9068: JSON Web Token (JWT) Profile for OAuth 2.0 Access Tokens
=================================================================

This section contains the generic implementation of RFC9068_.
JSON Web Token (JWT) Profile for OAuth 2.0 Access Tokens allows
developpers to generate JWT access tokens.

Using JWT instead of plain text for access tokens result in different
possibilities:

- User information can be filled in the JWT claims, similar to the
  :ref:`specs/oidc` ``id_token``, possibly making the economy of
  requests to the ``userinfo_endpoint``.
- Resource servers do not *need* to reach the authorization server
  :ref:`specs/rfc7662` endpoint to verify each incoming tokens, as
  the JWT signature is a proof of its validity. This brings the economy
  of one network request at each resource access.
- Consequently, the authorization server do not need to store access
  tokens in a database. If a resource server does not implement this
  spec and still need to reach the authorization server introspection
  endpoint to check the token validation, then the authorization server
  can simply validate the JWT without requesting its database.
- If the authorization server do not store access tokens in a database,
  it won't have the possibility to revoke the tokens. The produced access
  tokens will be valid until the timestamp defined in its ``exp`` claim
  is reached.

This specification is just about **access** tokens. Other kinds of tokens
like refresh tokens are not covered.

RFC9068_ define a few optional JWT claims inspired from RFC7643_ that can
can be used to determine if the token bearer is authorized to access a
resource: ``groups``, ``roles`` and ``entitlements``.

This module brings tools to:

- generate JWT access tokens with :class:`~authlib.oauth2.rfc9068.JWTBearerTokenGenerator`
- protected resources endpoints and validate JWT access tokens with :class:`~authlib.oauth2.rfc9068.JWTBearerTokenValidator`
- introspect JWT access tokens with :class:`~authlib.oauth2.rfc9068.JWTIntrospectionEndpoint`
- deny JWT access tokens revokation attempts with :class:`~authlib.oauth2.rfc9068.JWTRevocationEndpoint`

.. _RFC9068: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9068.html
.. _RFC7643: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7643

API Reference
-------------

.. module:: authlib.oauth2.rfc9068

.. autoclass:: JWTBearerTokenGenerator
    :member-order: bysource
    :members:

.. autoclass:: JWTBearerTokenValidator
    :member-order: bysource
    :members:

.. autoclass:: JWTIntrospectionEndpoint
    :member-order: bysource
    :members:

.. autoclass:: JWTRevocationEndpoint
    :member-order: bysource
    :members:
